# Increasing Impact
Another method of building professional recognition is through the use of different techniques for measuring the use and impact of your journal. This will provide clear evidence of the success of your journal and allow you to regularly evaluate your progress.
Under the traditional subscription/print model, the number of subscribers often formed the basis for understanding the usage of an individual journal. For open access journals, without a subscriber base to point to, this can be a challenge. OJS, however, does provide the option of requiring readers to register. A fee is not necessarily required for this registration, but does allow the journal to develop a better understanding of its audience. Some statistical analysis and reports are available to the OJS Journal Manager, including reporting on the number of registered users. The reporting and statistics capabilities of OJS are available in the [OJS statistics documentation](https://docs.pkp.sfu.ca/admin-guide/en/statistics).

Perhaps more important than the question of how many people are accessing your journal is how they are using it. This is known as measuring the “impact” of your journal. Journals with high citation impact are among the most respected and successful academic journals in their fields. Citation impact refers to how often an article, an author, or a journal, is cited by other scholars. While this is not an uncontroversial means of measuring the value a journal is having in the academic community, it is the standard one that most people recognize and operate on the basis of. Readers looking for reliable information will often first look to journals with a high citation impact. Prospective authors, reviewers, and editors will be interested in volunteering their time with journals that have a high citation impact. Indexes and databases will want to include journals in their resources that have a high citation impact. And lastly, libraries will be motivated to promote journals with a high citation impact. All of this can lead to a cyclical pattern, where high impact journals are more likely to be used and supported, leading to more recognition, and higher impact. The challenge for every new journal is to get this process started, using some of the methods discussed in the previous section.

Of particular interest for OJS and other open access journals are the results from several studies revealing that open access policies tend to increase the citation impact of journals (“Bibliography of Empirical Studies on Open Access”, 2006). By providing free and immediate access to their content, open access journals are increasingly becoming the first choice among scholars for their research.
