# Staying found: Ensuring Continuity

Once your journal has developed a loyal readership, and established itself with a variety of indexes and databases, and other venues, you will need to be able to maintain these relationships. One of the fastest ways to undermine the confidence in your publication is if your content becomes regularly unavailable, or worse, disappears completely.
For print journals, reliable access is helped by the production of many physical copies of the journal, and their widespread distribution. If one copy is lost or misplaced, it can easily be replaced by a copy of another.

For online content, there is the danger of there being only a single copy, which is shared electronically among all readers over the Internet. If that single copy is lost, it is irreplaceable, and the results can be catastrophic for your project. In this section we delve into some specific and more technical aspects of running the OJS software. If you’re running your own instance of OJS some of this may be more applicable to technical staff that may be running your OJS software. Having someone working with you who is knowledgeable about Web security and systems administration can be of significant benefit to your journal. If possible, it is important to seek out someone with the necessary skills to be able to assist you with these matters.  The section that follows provides a brief overview of many aspects of running OJS in particular, you may wish to consult some of our other [documentation](https://docs.pkp.sfu.ca) for more of an in-depth guide. 
