---
generateHeadingToc: true
title: OJS/OMP v3.2 Release Notebook - OJS/OMP
---

# Release Notebook for OJS/OMP v3.2

OJS and OMP v3.2 were released on 29 February, 2020. This release notebook provides technical guidance on changes that will impact software developers, plugin and theme authors, and anyone who works with the application codebase.

## Versioning for articles and monographs

This release introduces article and monograph versioning. This is a significant breaking change that will impact almost all third-party code. When a submission is published, changes to the publication can only be made by creating and publishing a new version of that submission.

To accomplish this, a new `Publication` object has been introduced which stores a submission's title, metadata, contributors, galleys and any data related to the published submission.

When a new version is created, a deep copy of the publication is created including attached objects such as authors and galleys. Hooks are available to clone additional objects which you may need to associate with the publication.

Read our guidance on [working with publication versions](/dev/documentation/en/publication-versions). Learn how this will impact [custom themes](/pkp-theming-guide/en/publication-versions). And view the documentation for changes to the [REST API endpoints](/dev/api/ojs/3.2).

## PublishedArticle and PublishedMonograph removed

The `PublishedArticle` and `PublishedMonograph` objects have been removed. Check the submission's status to determine if it is published.

```php
if ($submission->getData('status') === STATUS_PUBLISHED) {
    // submission is published
}
```

The `PublishedArticleDAO` and `PublishedMonographDAO` DAOs have also been removed. Published submissions should be retrieved by using the `status` argument of the submission [service](/dev/documentation/en/architecture-services).

```php
$publishedSubmissions = Services::get('submission')
    ->getMany(['status' => STATUS_PUBLISHED]);
```

The data of a `PublishedArticle` or `PublishedMonograph` has been migrated to the `Publication` object. See [publication versions](/dev/documentation/en/publication-versions).

## Submission helper methods deprecated

Most of the helper methods for the `Submission` class have been deprecated and may be removed in the near future.

```php
// Deprecated
$abstract = $submission->getLocalizedAbstract();

// Use this instead
$abstract = $submission->getCurrentPublication()->getLocalizedData('abstract');
```

Some helper methods are still available on the `Publication` object.

```php
// Deprecated
$title = $submission->getLocalizedTitle();

// Use this instead
$title = $submission->getCurrentPublication()->getLocalizedTitle();
```

## Database schema changes

The `published_submissions` table has been removed. Most of the data is now available in the `publications` table. The following table names have changed:

- `submission_categories` is now `publication_categories`
- `submission_galley_settings` is now `publication_galley_settings`
- `submission_galleys` is now `publication_galleys`

## Translations now use .po files

Translation files have been converted from `xml` to `po` files and all translations should be submitted through our [Weblate translation server](https://pkp.sfu.ca/2020/01/22/introducing-weblate-a-new-path-for-ojs-omp-translations/).

Existing `xml` translation files will continue to work, but compatibility may be removed at any time in the future. Convert an `xml` translation file to `po` format by using `lib/pkp/tools/xmlToPo.php` (for the locale files) and `lib/pkp/tools/xmlEmailsToPo.php` (for email templates).

Using translations in the application has not changed and should still use the `__('example.phrase')` syntax.

## Email templates now use .po files

Email templates have been converted to `po` format so that they can be translated using our [Weblate translation server](https://pkp.sfu.ca/2020/01/22/introducing-weblate-a-new-path-for-ojs-omp-translations/). This effects all email templates shipped with OJS and OMP as well as any email templates in plugins.

Existing XML email templates will continue to work, but compatibility may be removed at any time in the future. The following [pull request](https://github.com/pkp/orcidProfile/pull/90) shows how the email templates were converted for the Orcid plugin.

## New status introduced: STATUS_SCHEDULED

In OJS, a `Submission` or `Publication` will be set to `STATUS_SCHEDULED` when it has been approved for publication in an issue that is not yet published. It will be granted `STATUS_PUBLISHED` when the issue is published.

In OMP, `STATUS_SCHEDULED` will be set when a `Publication` has been approved for publication with a `datePublished` that is in the future. A scheduled task has been introduced to grant `STATUS_PUBLISHED` when the date has been reached.

A `Submission`'s status will be updated automatically when any of its `Publication` objects have been published or unpublished. Never set the `status` directly for submissions and publications. Instead, use `Services::get('publication')->publish($publication)` and `Services::get('publication')->unpublish($publication)` to ensure the correct hooks are fired and the submission's `status` is kept in sync.

Once a `Submission` has been published, it will remain `STATUS_PUBLISHED` as long as one `Publication` object is published.

## Integration testing migrated to Cypress

We now use [Cypress](https://www.cypress.io/) for our integration testing. This applies to the full suite of tests for [OJS](https://github.com/pkp/ojs/tree/main/cypress) and [OMP](https://github.com/pkp/omp/tree/main/cypress) as well as plugin integration tests (see [Static Pages](https://github.com/pkp/staticPages/tree/main/cypress/)).

Learn more in our documentation on [testing](/dev/testing/en).

## Changes to Service and QueryBuilder syntax

A Service class's `getMany()` method now returns a `DAOResultIterator` instead of an array. The iterator can be used like an array in `foreach` loops:

```php
$contextsIterator = Services::get('context')->getMany(['isEnabled' => true]);
foreach ($contextsIterator as $context) {
    $names[] = $context->getLocalizedData('name');
}
```

However, a `DAOResultIterator` is not an array. It can not be looped over twice and it can not be used with the `array_map`, `array_filter` or `array_reduce` functions.

Use `count()` instead of `!empty()` to check if any results were found.

```php
$contextsIterator = Services::get('context')->getMany(['isEnabled' => true]);
if (count($contextsIterator)) {
    // one or more contexts were found
}
```

Our documentation has been updated to reflect this change as well as new methods for the [Service](/dev/documentation/en/architecture-services#entityreadinterface) and [QueryBuilder](/dev/documentation/en/architecture-database#querybuilder) classes to help you retrieve data.

## Service class to retrieve usage and editorial stats

New service classes are available to help you retrieve and calculate statistics about your journal or press. The `PKPStatsService` will help extract data on visits to journals, articles and galleys. And the `PKPStatsEditorialService` will help you calculate data on submissions received, accepted and published, and how long authors must wait for editorial decisions.

Read more about working with [reader](/dev/documentation/en/statistics-reader) and [editorial](/dev/documentation/en/statistics-editorial) statistics. You may also retrieve stats through the [API](/dev/api/ojs/3.2).

## New API endpoints

Several new API endpoints have been introduced. Endpoints are now available to:

- Add, edit, version and publish submissions
- Create journals and presses and modify their settings
- Retrieve reader and editorial stats
- Add, edit and delete email templates

Read the [API Reference](/dev/api/ojs/3.2).

## Config settings

A new setting, `api_secret_key`, must be set in the `config.inc.php` file in order to use the API with an [API Token](/dev/api/#api-token).

An unsubscribe link is now sent with each automated email. A new setting, `signed_page_key_secret` must be set in the `config.inc.php` file in order for this link to work.

## New forms for context settings and submission metadata

Our new architecture for building forms is now in use. These forms can be found in the journal settings as well as the new publication forms in the workflow.

Forms using this architecture can be built field-by-field from PHP classes on the server side.

```php
$exampleForm = new \PKP\components\forms\FormComponent(
    'exampleForm',          // unique form id
    'PUT',                  // POST or PUT
    'http://...',           // URL to API endpoint to process the form
    __('success.message'),  // Message to display on success
    $locales,               // Array of locales to support
);
$exampleForm->addField(new FieldText('name', [
        'label' => __('manager.setup.contextTitle'),
        'value' => $context->getData('name'),
    ]))
    ->addField(new FieldText('acronym', [
        'label' => __('manager.setup.contextInitials'),
        'value' => $context->getData('acronym'),
    ]));
```

Each form provides a hook so that you can extend it in a plugin.

```php
\HookRegistry::register('Form::config::before', function($hookName, $form) {
    if ($form->id === 'exampleForm') {
        $form->addField(new FieldText('itemsPerPage', [
            'label' => __('common.itemsPerPage'),
            'value' => $context->getData('itemsPerPage'),
        ]));
    }

    return false;
});
```

All supported form fields extend the `Field` class. A class can be found for each field component described in the [UI Library](/dev/ui-library/dev).

Our plan is to migrate all of our forms to this architecture. Further documentation is in progress which will describe how the forms interact with the Vue.js components and the REST API.

## Article and Monograph objects renamed

The `Article` and `Monograph` objects were renamed to `Submission`. This should help us share code between the applications.

## More theme options

Theme options now support all of the form field types in our [UI Library](/dev/ui-library/dev) except the image and file upload fields. Read our updated [theming guide](/pkp-theming-guide/en/).

## Languages, Countries and Currencies

We have replaced our local tools for deriving ISO codes for languages, countries and currencies with [php-isocodes](https://github.com/sokil/php-isocodes).

## New components in UI Library

Our UI Library is growing rapidly as we transition our editorial backend to Vue.js. Explore all of the components available in the [UI Library](/dev/ui-library/dev).